[RFC 0999] Using Tuist in React Native (#672)
react-native-community/discussions-and-proposals: proposals/0672-tuist-react-native.md

title: Tuist.io in React Native
author:
- Riccardo Cipolleschi
date: 2023-06-19
---

# RFC0672: Tuist.io in React Native 

## Summary

Managing Xcodeproj files is error prone and time consuming. 

The current proposal suggests to move away from manually managing `Xcodeproj` files in favor of a declarative description leveraging [Tuist.io](https://tuist.io) as tool.

## Basic example

You can have a look at it in action in this PR:

- https://github.com/facebook/react-native/pull/37952

The idea is to describe the project with a declarative approach using Swift. Tuist allows you to load the `Project.swift` file in an instance of Xcode, leveraging also code completion and type checking to ensure the correctness of the project.

## Motivation

Managing Xcodeproj files is error prone and time consuming. Those files are source of frustrations for teams using them and they have been reported as one of the main pain point when users have to migrate to a new version of React Native.

They are also an old way to manage projects. Even Apple realized that they are not the best approach and started developing Swift Package Manager (SwiftPM) that replace the project for developing libraries.

> Moder approaches relies on declarative syntax to describe how the project should look like and tools that can generate a valid Xcodeproj starting from that description.

Reviewer: > Moder approaches relies

Modern approaches rely? Or what exactly did you want to say here?

There are several tools that we can use, but the proposed one is [Tuist.io](https://tuist.io).

> [Tuist.io](https://tuist.io) is OSS and currently maintained by several companies, among which Shopify, which is already a React Native partner.

Reviewer: Just a note that I happen to be at Shopify and a maintainer of Tuist, but Tuist and Shopify are not officially affiliated.

We don't have a company directly maintaining the tool but there are lots of large companies using it, some of them also financially sponsor us.

It allows the users to describe their Apple projects in Swift (the default language for iOS), and it also leverage Xcode for type checking and code completion, ensuring that the project definition is valid at compile time.

## Detailed design

To adopt Tuist in React Native, we need to follow some steps:

1. Land https://github.com/facebook/react-native/pull/37952. This PR already contains a functioning project which passed all the iOS tests in CI.

> 2. Update the CLI to install Tuist in the user machine. Tuist comes directly with a `tuistenv`additional tool, which handle the environment and version for the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Update the CLI to install Tuist in the user machine. Tuist comes directly with an additional executable called `tuistenv`, which handles the environment and version for the user.
```

> 2. Update the CLI to install Tuist in the user machine. Tuist comes directly with a `tuistenv`additional tool, which handle the environment and version for the user.

Reviewer 2: Have you considered an approach similar to the one that tools like ESBuild follow where the binary is downloaded when the NPM packages is installed using hooks? It'd require us (Tuist) to maintain the NPM package, but they'd be able to pin the version of Tuist using the package manager's pinning solution, and also cache Tuist with the caching of all the `node_modules` in environments like CI.
Just putting it out there for further discussion.

Author: Hi @pepicrft, thanks for the suggestion.

I am not very familiar with the NPM hooks and workflows. If Tuist is open to maintain an NPM package, surely it would be an improvement over the current proposal.

Author: Resolving this, added the proposed idea in the RFC

> 3. Update the CLI and instruct it to swap the `HelloWorld` strings in the `template/ios/Package.swift` to  the AppName chosen by the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Update the CLI and instruct it to swap the `HelloWorld` strings in the `template/ios/Package.swift` to the AppName chosen by the user.
```

> 4. Update the CLI to run `tuist generate` to create the project

Reviewer: Will `tuist generate` be run as part of `yarn react-native run-ios`?

Author: In my mind, yes.

The CLI steps would be:
1. Check if tuist is installed. If not, install it
2. Run tuist generate
3. Install bundler
4. run pod install

Author: I will update the RFC tomorrow

> 5. Update doctor to check that the user have tuist installed

Reviewer 2: I would avoid requiring users to have Tuist installed because it adds unnecessary friction. Installing it as part of an NPM package package addresses the issue.

Author: As pointed out above, if Tuist would like to maintain that NPM package, it would be great. Otherwise, the suggested approach is a way not to depend on anyone. 😄

> 6. Remove the old Xcodeproj file and set the right `.gitignore` settings.

Reviewer 2: Once this lands, I'd like to explore removing the dependency with CocoaPods and Ruby. Developers would only need to have Node and a package manager like NPM in their environments. Solving that problem would require:

- Including a `Project.swift` in every React Native dependency.
- Adjusting the Tuist graph resolution to look up packages under `node_modules`.

We can even go further and support defining the project in the `package.json`:

```json
{
  "tuist": {
    "project": {
       targets: []
     }
  }
}
```

Author: That's not possible at the moment: we use cocoapods to install some local dependencies shipped by React Native, to run some Codegen and to configure the workspace for the user.
All the libraries in the ecosystem are also leveraging Cocoapods unfortunately.

Not that we won't be able to do it ever, but:
1. It will require a lot of work on everyone's side
2. It will require and ecosystem migration (and we are already going through one right now)
3. I think that to remove Ruby and Cocoapods, the best alternative would be Swift Package Manager.

## Drawbacks

- Prioritization: I think that the only reason NOT to do this is for prioritization and time. Implementing this system will take some time which we can devote to other, maybe more impactful, activities.
- Impact: This work could simplify updates, but recently we have started pushing all the changes to the Xcodeproj into the Cocoapods scripts. This means that the users don't have to touch the project file at all, and Cocoapods takes care of modifying the project when needed. It is still useful to have a laid-out description of the project, especially for brownfield projects that have to mimic the same configurations of a template app.

> - Workflow changes: there is an extra step that user has to run when modifying the project: after every change in the `Project.swift`, users have to run `tuist generate`. This is a minor issue as we do not expect for the user to manually update the `Project.swift` file at all, and we can bake most of the tuist invocations in th e CLI. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Workflow changes: there is an extra step that user has to run when modifying the project: after every change in the `Project.swift`, users have to run `tuist generate`. This is a minor issue as we do not expect for the user to manually update the `Project.swift` file at all, and we can bake most of the tuist invocations in the CLI. 
```

> ## Alternatives

Author: On top of the reasons @fortmarek described, SwiftPM does not allow for mixed language packages (e.g. Swift and C++ in the same package) and it requires that the modules are in a specific format (i.e.: they must be Clang modules).
Currently, React Native would have packages with mixed languages (not Swift yet, but libraries can be in that state) and all the C++ modules are not Clang modules.. :( 

So it won't even build.

> ## Alternatives

Author: Resolving as I rewrote part of the RFC including a discussion on SwiftPM

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 3: I was under the impression that SPM _did_ support mixed languages. At the very least, we ship both objective c and swift code in our own package I'm fairly sure. Maybe not c++. But yes, I imagine being a clang module is a hard requirement. Thanks for the info!

### [XCodeGen](https://github.com/yonaskolb/XcodeGen)

This tool allows to describe the Xcodeproj using a YAML file.

If we go for this approach, the drawbacks are:

- a new language to teach our users
- more verbose project description
- no code completion.

### [Xcake](https://github.com/igor-makarov/xcake/)

> This tool allow to describe a project in Ruby.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tool allows to describe a project in Ruby.
```
